He was an old man,
a very successful one.
He’d made a lot of money in his time.
But let’s not envy him,
because for much of his life
he was under a lot of pressure.
His first marriage was a troubled one;
his wife was cold and critical.
He raised a large family in the truth,
but some of his sons
didn’t turn out so well.
A few of his friends weren’t there
for him when he needed them most.
He lost a child in death.
You may have guessed
that we’re talking about David,
the writer of the 37th Psalm.
“I was once young,”
he said, but “now I am old.”
So here is an old man
taking stock of his life
and sharing a secret with us.
What was it that helped him to cope
when everything around him was going wrong?
Let’s find out.
Let’s turn to Psalm 37:4.
This is the theme text for our discussion,
so I’ll give you a moment to find that
—Psalm 37:4.
And David writes:
“Find exquisite delight in Jehovah,
and he will grant you
the desires of your heart.”
We’re going to focus on the first part
of the verse at this point:
“Find exquisite delight in Jehovah.”
“Exquisite delight,”
or maybe you say exquisite.
Whether you say exquisite or exquisite,
we don’t use that expression very much,
do we?
But look down at the footnote;
it says: “Find your greatest joy.”
So David is saying,
‘Find your greatest joy in Jehovah,
and he will give you
the desire of your heart.’
And that was David’s secret.
He couldn’t always count on his family life.
And he never knew
when a trusted friend would turn against him.
But he did know his God.
He knew that Jehovah
would never disappoint him.
Well, that’s a good reminder for us,
isn’t it?
Humans may disappoint,
Jehovah, never.
He is our North Star.
And so when we get lost
or when we get confused,
when we feel we’ve lost our way,
we really need to look heavenward.
Look to Jehovah,
and let Jehovah
be our “greatest joy.”
To know Jehovah is to love him.
Now, what do you do when you
want to get close to someone,
when you want to develop
a friendship with someone?
Well, you find ways
to spend time with that person.
You want that person as a friend.
And so you go about finding ways
to spend time with that person.
Well, it’s the same with Jehovah God.
We want him as our Friend.
So, what do we do?
We look for ways to spend time with him—
reading his Word, meditating on his Word,
letting it sink deeply into our heart.
And then the more we get to know Jehovah,
the more we love him
and the more at ease
we’ll be in his presence.
And that’s where prayer comes in.
We can develop a friendship with Jehovah
that is so close, so intimate,
that we can confide in Jehovah
things that we would never,
ever tell another human on earth.
And the good news?
The good news is that Jehovah wants
us to get just that close to him.
Well, we had big plans
for this summer, didn’t we?
Special conventions,
regional conventions
in all parts of the earth,
happy times, warm fellowship
—and then the coronavirus.
You know, at the end of March,
the Governing Body realized
that we were going to have to make
some important adjustments
as far as the conventions were concerned.
Well, what to do?
All of the outlines had been prepared
—48 of them.
Well, the Teaching Committee
came up with an idea.
Let’s have the Governing Body
and many of the helpers
deliver all of the convention talks
on the program.
We’ll record them,
and then the brothers
in all parts of the earth
will be able to enjoy
the program in safety.
Well, this was going to be
a tremendous job
for a number of Bethel departments.
Sixty members of the Broadcasting Department
here at headquarters
worked tirelessly over a three-week period
to schedule and record the program.
And in the branches,
thousands of energetic volunteers
in our translation departments
produced the program in 400 languages
—probably more than 400 languages
when it’s all done.
And then, 44 broadcasting departments
in the branches also had a share.
So to all of those who had a share
in making this program possible,
all those who were involved in scheduling
and recording and translating,
we want to say: “Thank you.
Thank you so very much
for all you’ve done for us.”
Now, speaking of broadcasting,
do you think Jehovah has been preparing us
for something like this pandemic?
Think about this:
A few years ago, the decision was made
to set up something called JW Broadcasting®.
And at the time, who knew
how practical an arrangement
that was going to turn out to be?
And who knows what uses JWB
will be put to in the future?
Jehovah knows.
Jehovah looks ahead.
Sometimes we don’t know ourselves
why certain decisions are made
or why we are making certain decisions,
but Jehovah knows.
Jehovah is our “greatest joy.”
And here’s another thing:
When the theme
for this convention was being chosen,
there was no coronavirus on the horizon.
Yet, can you think of a better theme
for a convention than this one?
Joy—what an appropriate theme
for a convention!
Now, some of you have lost your jobs,
others have been very sick
during the past few months,
and a few of you
have lost loved ones in death.
There’s no way you can be happy
about those circumstances.
But you can rejoice
in your knowledge of Jehovah.
You can rejoice in your knowledge
of what Jehovah God
has in store for us in the future.
People outside don’t have that.
We do.
We rejoice in Jehovah.
And did you notice
how well our convention program
matched up with the theme
for this year’s yeartext?
“Make disciples . . . , baptizing them.”
We had so much information
on how to improve on our teaching skills.
Why do you think that is?
Could it be that there’s
a lot more work to do in that respect?
Well, we don’t know
when the great tribulation is going to come,
but we are determined
to keep busy until the end does come.
And wasn’t it a good idea
to have us follow the progress
of a Bible student, Jade, as Neeta
overcame one challenge after another?
That was realistic, wasn’t it?
What a transformation!
Jade isn’t “jaded” anymore.
And there was
a subtle message in those videos:
We should never,
ever trust first impressions.
First impressions can be wrong.
Well, whether you’re conducting
a study right now or not,
I’m sure you can hardly wait
to get back to the field
to apply some of those suggestions.
What a wonderful part
of the program that was!
But what about
other parts of the program?
Do you remember
some of these highlights?
Let’s watch.
There are millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses
around the world,
each finding a way
to be joyful.
Despite the trials we face,
we can find joy
in the choices we’re making,
in the families we’re raising,
from the creation we’re observing,
from the peace we’re promoting.
Joy is found
in the message we’re preaching.
Jehovah promises us joy despite
the trials we’re enduring
and persecution we’re facing.
He promises us joy
through the stand we’re taking.
Through anything in life,
you can find joy in Jehovah.
He wants you to be happy.
His joy can be yours
now and forever!
So will you accept it?
Jehovah has the right to expect
that we’ll love him
even more than we love
our husband, our wife,
our son or daughter, or our parents.
He also has the right to expect
that we’ll love him
more than we love our job,
a favorite hobby,
or maybe a sport
that we’re passionate about.
Jehovah has to come first.
Has your desire to put Jehovah first
been tested during this pandemic?
You lost your job,
and you searched desperately
for another one.
Finally, after a long search,
you found one,
but it was a job that would require you
to miss all your meetings
and opportunities for field service.
What a temptation to take that job!
You’ve been out of work for months.
You felt helpless, because a family member
is supposed to provide for his family.
It would take a lot of faith
for you to refuse that job,
pray to Jehovah, and then wait,
to hold on a little longer
to see what Jehovah
would work out for you,
showing that Jehovah has to come first,
even when it comes
to providing for our family.
We have the example of the Jews
who were returning from Babylon to Jerusalem.
Now, captivity in Babylon
wasn’t as harsh as slavery in Egypt.
Jews in Babylon could build a house,
run a business, plant a vineyard,
get comfortable in life.
Some of them even got rich.
Scholars believe that it was in Babylon
that the Jews learned about the art
of buying and selling, trade, and commerce.
So it would take real faith on their part
to leave their house, their business,
close friends and relatives
who wanted to remain in Babylon
and go to Jerusalem
—a city with none of the glitz of Babylon,
a city that most of them had never seen.
That would take real faith.
Well, the returning Jews
got off to a great start.
They constructed
the foundation of the temple,
but then they ran into problems.
There was danger.
So how would they show that Jehovah
comes first in the face of danger?
Well, they keep on building the temple
in spite of the danger.
But what do they do?
Well, they got scared,
and they talked themselves
into believing that it mustn’t be
Jehovah’s will
for them to build the temple.
Why not?
Because it was hard.
So they started
looking after themselves,
looking after their own interests.
Now remember, Jerusalem was in ruins.
It wasn’t going to be easy
to start a business,
plant crops, and build a house
in a ruined city.
But they didn’t say,
“Oh, this is hard;
“so it mustn’t be Jehovah’s will
for me to feed my family.”
They found a way to feed their family.
Well, they should’ve had
the same determination
when it came to Jehovah’s worship
because Jehovah has to come first.
Now, these were good people.
They had had enough faith to leave Babylon
and return to Jerusalem in the first place.
But that first love had cooled off.
Now, let’s see how Jehovah felt about that.
Let’s turn to Haggai chapter 1,
and we’re going to read
a few verses at Haggai,
so keep your Bibles open there, please.
We’re going to turn to Haggai chapter 1.
And first of all,
we’re going to read verses 2 through 6
to see how Jehovah felt
about this choice
that the Jews had made,
putting themselves ahead
of his worship in spite of danger.
“‘This is what Jehovah of armies says,
“‘“These people say,
‘The time has not yet come
“for the house of Jehovah to be built.’”’
“And the word of Jehovah again
came through Haggai the prophet,
“saying: ‘Is it the time
“‘for you to dwell in your paneled houses,
“while this house lies in ruins?’
“Now this is what Jehovah of armies says,
“‘Set your heart on your ways.
“‘You have sown much seed,
but you harvest little.
“‘You eat, but it is not to satisfaction.
“‘You drink, but you do not drink your fill.
“‘You put on clothing, but no one gets warm.
“‘The one who hires himself out
puts his wages in a bag full of holes.’”
Now, do you think Jehovah
didn’t want them
to build a house or feed their family?
Of course not.
But Jehovah’s worship has to come first.
That’s what exclusive devotion
is all about.
Well, what else
do we learn from these verses?
What’s Jehovah telling the people?
He’s saying: ‘Look at you.
‘You work and work and work.
‘You’re not getting anywhere.
You’re aren’t getting rich,
and you aren’t even making ends meet.’
Why not?
They didn’t have the blessing of Jehovah.
“It is the blessing of Jehovah
that makes one rich.”
Now, one of the scenes
from our dramatic Bible reading
illustrates this point very well.
Let’s remind ourselves.
Let’s have a look.
Jehovah compares the results
of the Jews’ self-centered efforts
to those of a hired worker who puts
his wages into a moth-eaten sack.
Because the Jews
are neglecting the house of Jehovah,
he holds back his blessing.
The results of the Jews’ labor are limited,
and their lives lack joy.
Evidently, some try to fill that void
by beautifying their own homes.
But material things
cannot satisfy spiritual needs.
Can we see the warning here for us?
It’s not wrong to enjoy nice things.
But material things
cannot bring us true and lasting joy,
especially if we neglect
Jehovah’s work to obtain them.
Now, there’s nothing wrong
with buying new things.
I don’t think many of us
still have a black-and-white TV.
The point is, Jehovah must come first.
Remember, the Jews
were facing stiff opposition.
There was danger.
So I want you to notice a little detail
as we read Haggai 1:7, 8.
I told you to keep your Bibles open.
I didn’t, but I’ve got it again
—Haggai 1:7, 8.
Now, notice, the Jews are in danger.
There are opposers,
but we’re looking for a little detail
that should have reassured
the Jews in verses 7 and 8:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says,
“‘Set your heart on your ways.
“‘Go up to the mountain and bring in lumber.
“‘And build the house,
so that I may take pleasure in it
and I may be a glorified,’ Jehovah says.”
Did you see it—“Jehovah of armies”?
Now, that expression
is repeated over and over again
in the book of Haggai,
and it should have reassured the Jews
that their enemies were nothing
in comparison with Jehovah
and his armies.
This is Jehovah telling the Jews:
‘Go ahead.
Build the temple. I have your back.’
Find your “greatest joy” in Jehovah.
That’s really the theme
that we’re talking about today.
Let’s talk about it.
And let’s talk about some aspects
of this very important theme.
First of all, we’ll talk
about our relationship with Jehovah.
That’s so important.
In the introduction to this talk,
we mentioned David.
He had a lot of problems,
maybe more than most of us.
And yet, he never lost his joy.
He found joy
in his relationship with Jehovah.
Now, his physical living conditions
weren’t always the best.
When King Saul was alive,
David was on the run most of the time.
Where did he sleep?
In a cave,
in a place “difficult to approach,”
just anywhere that was safe.
And then at times David
and his men ran low on food.
Sometimes they ran out of food.
Do you know the feeling?
Have you been low on food
during this pandemic?
David couldn’t even enjoy
a normal married life
because he’d married the daughter of Saul,
but then Saul had given her to another man.
So, what got him through all that?
His relationship with Jehovah.
Jehovah was the constant in his life.
And you could just feel
the unbreakable bond
between Jehovah and David
when you read the 16th Psalm.
Now, there’s something
very interesting about this Psalm.
Let’s turn there.
And first of all, we’re just going
to look at verse 1 briefly.
Psalm 16,
and notice in verse 1
the situation that David is in.
He is in need of protection.
In some unstated way,
David is in danger.
But you know what’s interesting
about this Psalm?
For the rest of it,
he doesn’t dwell on his problems.
He dwells on the way
Jehovah is helping him with his problems.
Notice verse 8, David says:
“I keep Jehovah before me constantly.
Because he is at my right hand,
I will never be shaken.”
So with his eyes of faith,
David could see
Jehovah beside him, protecting him.
Now, if we can have that vision,
we’re not going to be afraid
of anything or anyone, are we?
Now, find your “greatest joy” in Jehovah?
Here is a man who is in need of protection.
Here is a man who feels he’s in danger.
Notice verse 9:
“So my heart rejoices,
my whole being is joyful.
And I reside in security.”
He’s in danger in some way,
and yet he feels safe.
He feels secure.
Then notice verse 10.
Usually we apply verse 10
to the resurrection of Jesus.
But think of it from David’s perspective:
“For you will not leave me in the Grave.”
David knew that even if somehow
he were to die,
Jehovah would not leave him in the Grave.
He would resurrect him.
At the end of verse 11,
a beautiful expression:
“In your presence is abundant joy.”
Do you notice the expressions
“my heart rejoices,”
“my whole being is joyful,”
“in your presence is abundant joy”?
David’s life wasn’t always easy,
but feeling that he was
in the presence of Jehovah
—feeling the support of Jehovah—
helped him to get through it
and to get through it with joy.
Well, your life isn’t always easy.
I’m sure you’ve had many
anxious moments during this pandemic.
But then, you turned away from your problems,
you focused on Jehovah God, and you reset.
Your joy returned.
How many reasons for joy can you think of?
The song says they’re “abundant.”
Let’s think of a few.
Here’s one: Jesus said:
“No man [no man] can come to me
unless the Father . . . draws him.”
Now, think what that means.
Jehovah saw something in you that he loves.
He looked down, and he said:
“I want that person in the new world.”
Don’t try to argue with Jehovah.
Don’t say: “You made a mistake.
“You don’t mean me.
“You must mean the fellow next to me.
But me?
I’m not worth it.”
Jehovah drew you to the truth.
Accept it.
God loves you.
Now that is a reason for joy.
Another reason for joy
is that Jehovah answers our prayers.
He’s always available,
always ready to listen.
We can pray
in any language at any time.
Jehovah won’t always do
what we ask him to do,
but he will always listen.
We find joy in Jehovah’s service
because he’s reasonable
in what he expects of us.
You come home after a long day’s work;
you’re exhausted, worn out, stressed out.
You come home from field service
or from the meeting; you’re refreshed.
Jehovah is reasonable.
We’re also confident that Jehovah
will provide our food and clothing
no matter how dire the situation gets.
Now, what he provides
might not always be fancy,
but it’ll always be enough.
It’ll always be adequate to get us through.
And we should always be grateful
for anything Jehovah provides,
no matter how simple it might be.
A researcher once drew a distinction
between Jehovah’s Witnesses
and some others
who were in concentration camps
in Nazi Germany.
A non-Witness might say:
“Where are the gods?
All I have to eat
is this miserable piece of bread.”
A Witness in the same camp
might say: “Oh, Jehovah, thank you.
“I have a piece of bread to eat.
“I can eat and regain my strength
“and live just a little longer to serve you.
And maybe I’ll be able to share
some of my bread with someone else.”
The conclusion of the researcher:
Both received the piece of bread.
But it was all in the point of view.
The Witness had a spiritual point of view,
and the Witness was grateful
for even a simple provision
that Jehovah had made.
Well, during this pandemic,
it could be that your menu
has been greatly simplified.
Maybe you haven’t been able to eat
the way you would normally eat.
If you had just pasta or rice to eat,
you didn’t say: “Look at this.
All I have to eat is pasta.
All I have to eat is rice.”
You thanked Jehovah
for the rice or for the pasta.
You were grateful for the provisions.
And you realized
that no matter how simple,
these provisions came from Jehovah.
Jehovah has also given us
a loving spiritual family.
And I think many of us
have come to the conclusion
that we never really understood
what a loving spiritual family we have
until this pandemic.
A young married couple were both afflicted
with the coronavirus—both of them.
Well, how would they eat?
They couldn’t go out shopping,
and they couldn’t see anyone.
The brother said,
“We had groceries at the door constantly.”
The wife says,
“I felt I had Jehovah’s
and everyone else’s arms
wrapped around me.”
Social distancing
doesn’t apply to Jehovah.
He can wrap his arms around anyone.
Many of our brothers have been reconnecting
with long-lost return visits
and unbelieving family members
and starting Bible studies with them.
And as you probably know,
meeting attendance has increased,
and inactive and disfellowshipped persons
are also trying to draw close to Jehovah.
One disfellowshipped person said,
“I view this
as one last warning from Jehovah.”
Now, just a word to any
who may be listening
who are no longer serving Jehovah.
What are you waiting for?
God loves you.
God wants you to return.
He wants to put his arms
around you once more.
So please, take advantage
of the invitation, and come back.
And please, don’t give in to the idea,
‘Well, I’ve done nothing up to now,
and now there’s been a pandemic,
‘and if I come back to the truth,
well, Jehovah is not going to accept me.’
Read your Bible.
You’ll find that in many cases,
it was a disaster of some sort
that caused people
to come to their senses
and return to Jehovah,
and Jehovah lovingly accepted them.
Think of Manasseh as an example.
Many have commented
that they’ve actually drawn closer
to their brothers and sisters
during this pandemic.
Many, many say,
“I feel more cared for than ever.”
We find joy in our relationship
with Jehovah
and with our brothers.
Now, we were talking about David.
He said in Psalm 16
that there “is abundant joy” in Jehovah.
But what was his joy based on?
It wasn’t based on his privileges
—David didn’t become king for years—
but it was on his relationship with Jehovah.
So this is a good example for us.
It may be that there is a privilege
that you’ve been expecting
that seems a long time coming.
What do you do in the meantime?
Keep working
on your relationship with Jehovah.
Keep strengthening that relationship.
It’ll be the best investment
you’ve ever made.
And don’t forget
the greatest privilege any of us can have
is to bear the name of Jehovah,
to be called one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
And we’re part of a family
of brothers and sisters
who love us and who would
even risk their lives for us.
So we’ve discussed finding joy
in our relationship with Jehovah.
Let’s consider a second aspect,
and that is finding joy in the Bible,
finding joy in God’s written Word.
We get to know Jehovah best
by reading his Word and meditating on it.
Now, in recent times,
the congregation Bible reading
has been shortened,
and there’s a good reason for that.
It’s not so we can get
our Bible reading over with
and get on to other things.
It’s so that we will take our time,
slow down,
meditate on what we’re reading.
Chew it up; digest it thoroughly.
This is Jehovah talking to you and to me,
sharing his thoughts with us.
This is amazing,
and we need to appreciate it.
Now, one way
that we can enjoy our Bible reading
is to make the connection
between what we’re reading now
and what we’ve read in the past
and see how they match up.
Let’s take an example—just a short one.
Turn to Numbers chapter 12
—Numbers 12:1, 2.
I think the setting
is pretty self-explanatory.
So Numbers 12:1, 2:
“Now Miriam and Aaron
began to speak against Moses
“because of the Cushite wife he had married,
“for he had taken a Cushite wife.
“They were saying: ‘Is it only by Moses
that Jehovah has spoken?
Has he not also spoken through us?’”
So, what was their argument?
Basically, in plain English,
their argument was that Moses
was hogging the limelight,
that he wanted to be the center of attention.
Now, is that true?
In the previous chapter
—chapter 11—
what do we read?
Moses willingly shares his authority
with 70 of the men of the elders of Israel.
So there was no serious question
about Moses wanting to have the limelight.
Moses was a humble man.
But now, this is Numbers chapter 12.
This is Aaron
questioning Moses’ authority.
But we can learn a little bit more about this
from something that is tucked far away
in the book of Deuteronomy.
Let’s turn to Deuteronomy chapter 9,
and we’re going to see
if we can learn something
about Aaron and why Aaron’s attitude
was so shocking
—Deuteronomy 9:20.
This is a revelation.
This is Moses
in the very last month of his life,
talking to the Israelites,
and he says:
“Jehovah was so angry with Aaron
“that he was ready to annihilate him,
but I made supplication for Aaron.”
Aaron owed his life to Moses.
And yet, he dares
to question Moses’ leadership
of the nation of Israel.
That is really shocking.
But now,
what does this teach you about Moses?
He is a very humble man,
and he’s not quick to take credit for things.
Now, why do we say that?
When Moses wrote the book of Exodus
and the story of the golden calf,
he never mentioned that Jehovah
wanted to annihilate Aaron
for his part in the golden-calf incident.
Aaron was still alive,
and Moses spared Aaron that indignity.
It’s only after Aaron’s death
and in the very last month
of Moses’ life that we learn about it.
Doesn’t that tell you something
about how kind and humble Moses was?
So this is just to illustrate the fact
that if we try to take one point
that we’ve learned in the past
and connect it up
with what we’re reading now,
it will often help
the Bible reading to come alive.
Now let’s consider some of the things
that God’s Word has done for us.
Do you remember what it was like
before you came into the truth?
A favorite relative of yours
who was happily married
lost her husband in death.
At the funeral, a priest told her
that her husband was in purgatory.
And unless the widow paid up,
he was going to stay there for a long time.
She’d just lost her husband.
How comforting was that?
But then you started studying the Bible.
You came to Romans 6:7:
“The one who has died
has been acquitted from his sin.”
“Acquitted from his sin”
—and your Bible teacher
explained what that means.
It means that when you die,
the debt is paid.
You don’t go on paying after death.
You don’t suffer in hell,
and you don’t suffer in purgatory.
That one Bible verse
could completely change your view
of what happens at death.
On the other hand,
maybe you grew up in a family
where evolution was the order of the day
—so no hope, no hope for the future.
This life is all there is.
Then you came to learn
that you have a heavenly Father
who loves you very much
and who wants to give you
a future and a hope.
What a joy it was to discover Jehovah!
Some of us grew up in a family
where the parents didn’t get along so well.
We couldn’t point to them and say,
“Now that is how
a man should treat his wife,”
or “That is how a woman
should treat her husband.”
They just didn’t get along.
We needed Jehovah; we needed the Bible;
we needed Jehovah’s organization
to teach us how to have a happy family life.
There’s more.
Recently a clergyman
was asked by a journalist
why pandemics like the coronavirus occur.
And the clergyman answered,
“Well, suffering is part of life.”
That didn’t answer the question.
The journalist wasn’t asking, ‘Do we suffer?’
The journalist knew that we suffer.
The journalist wanted to know why we suffer.
He didn’t get an answer.
A professor of New Testament theology
was asked the same question,
Why do we suffer?
Do you know what he said?
“Everybody suffers.
God suffers.”
What kind of an answer is that?
How happy we are to have the answers
to those questions from the Bible.
Now, speaking about God’s written Word,
since 1966, Jehovah’s organization
has made the Bible come alive
in the most outstanding way
through the Bible dramas.
It really has made the Bible come alive,
hasn’t it?
It’s helped us to visualize
what life was like in Bible times,
and we’ve come to realize
that people living in Bible times
weren’t really so very different
from people who are living today.
Let’s review a few scenes
and see what lessons we can glean.
Have a look.
Raham!
We had a visitor last night.
It was your wife,
or should I say your former wife.
Raham,
don’t you care how you’ve hurt your innocent mate?
How can you be so hard-hearted?
Look! Moses said if you find something
indecent with your wife, a man must write
a certificate of divorce, hand it to her,
and dismiss her.
If giving me no children isn’t indecent, then what is?
Besides, I’m tired of living with her.
I’m marrying Gizla today.
Gizla?
That Moabite girl?
I heard you bind yourself with an oath and a curse
not to take a wife from the nations!
God’s Law says: “They will turn your sons away
“from following me to serve other gods;
then Jehovah’s anger will blaze against you”!
Who are you to counsel me?
Every man must find his own joy,
and I intend to find mine.
Raham, only Jehovah can give true joy.
Do you really think you can give
yourself more joy than he can?
What’s the lesson?
Our “greatest joy” comes
when we obey Jehovah.
Let’s look again.
Come along.
Ana la mitbayen.
Come back here!
You have to listen to me. I’m your father!
What’s wrong with your children?
They don’t like coming to the temple.
Sweetie, why don’t you like it?
Shvok Y-ati!
Come back here now!
I’m sorry, my lord.
My wife speaks very little Hebrew.
Did you not swear never to marry someone
who doesn’t serve Jehovah?
Nehemiah, nobody cares.
Did you not?
Yes! Yes!
Then why have you ignored the command of Jehovah
and your own oath?
Let me go!
No wonder your children don’t love Jehovah.
Aah!
Did you imagine that you could succeed
without Jehovah’s blessing?
I prayed for Jehovah’s blessing!
Did you?
But you didn’t obey him.
Raham, how can Jehovah bless something
that is against his will?
And the lesson here?
Jehovah doesn’t answer prayers
that are not in harmony with his will.
And again—
What was that all about?
Raham refuses to move into Jerusalem,
and he wants us to support him.
What did you say?
I told him Nehemiah is doing Jehovah’s will.
Raham doesn’t understand how happy
he could be if-if he would just follow Jehovah’s direction.
So we will move if we are selected?
Yes.
I’d rather be like Nehemiah than like Raham.
You agree?
Yes.
Me too.
The lesson?
Happy families follow Jehovah’s direction.
Well, there are a lot more lessons
to be learned from this drama.
And you can discover them
as you review it at home.
You guessed it,
we’re releasing the drama today.
You can access it following this talk.
The chairman will show you how.
You may applaud.
So we find joy
in our relationship with Jehovah.
We find joy in studying his Word
and discovering beautiful things in his Word.
Now, what about Jehovah’s name?
Can we find joy in Jehovah’s name as well?
Particularly in the last few years,
a lot of emphasis has been placed
on Jehovah’s name.
At Warwick, in the museum,
we even have an exhibit
about the divine name.
Now, why do you suppose that is?
Why do you think there’s
so much emphasis on God’s name?
Well, Jehovah loves his name,
and he loves those who love his name.
That’s something we discover
when we read Malachi chapter 3
—Malachi chapter 3,
and verse 16.
I’ll give you a moment.
Malachi 3:16:
“At that time those who fear Jehovah
spoke with one another,
“each one with his companion,
“and Jehovah
kept paying attention and listening.
“And a book of remembrance was written
“before him for those fearing Jehovah
“[and notice this] and for those
meditating on his name.”
And then, in chapter 4 and verse 2,
Jehovah praises those “who honor [His] name.”
Now, let’s go back to this expression
“those meditating on his name.”
What do you think that means?
Surely it means more than
just accepting that God has a name.
We know that.
The Jews in Malachi’s day,
even the unfaithful ones, knew that.
But surely it means meditating
on the meaning of God’s name
and meditating on the role
that we can have in vindicating his name.
As you know, many scholars
believe that Jehovah’s name
means “He Causes to Become.”
Jehovah can become
whatever he needs to become,
and he can make you become
whatever he needs you to be.
In the days of Israel,
what did Jehovah need?
Often he needed prophets.
Where did he get them?
From ordinary people.
He took a very shy young man named Jeremiah
and turned him
into a bold and courageous prophet.
And he did the same with a farmer named Amos.
Don’t tell Jehovah what you can and can’t do.
You might be surprised
about what you can do
if you just put yourself in Jehovah’s hands.
How many in this audience once said:
“I could never preach from door to door,”
“I could never pioneer,”
“I could never be a missionary,”
“I could never serve
where the need is great”?
Well, Jehovah knew better.
We can trust Jehovah
and what he promises to do.
He will always keep his promises.
Now, when you
go through the Hebrew Scriptures,
you find certain expressions
over and over again.
The Jews rebel against Jehovah.
They do terrible things,
sometimes disgusting things.
And you, the reader, are saying:
‘Jehovah, you really
ought to annihilate these people.
It’s terrible what they’re doing.’
But then Jehovah reconsiders.
Why?
“‘For the sake of my promise
that I made to Abraham,’
“‘for the sake of the covenant
that [I] made with [my servant] David,’
‘for the sake of my name’”
—to Jehovah, a promise is a promise.
He promised Abraham and David
that he wouldn’t forsake their offspring.
And he meant what he said.
Now think what that means.
Nothing will make
Jehovah go back on his word.
When Jehovah promises
that he’s going to take this earth
and turn it into a paradise,
you can take that to the bank.
Jehovah will keep his promise.
Well, how has Jehovah shown
that a promise is a promise
during this convention?
What did he promise?
“My servants will eat.”
And the Governing Body
had to find a way to serve the food.
Jehovah provided the food.
He provided it in abundance.
And we thank him for it.
All praise goes to Jehovah
for this convention program.
Now, when we first discovered
that God has a name,
it was a turning point for many of us.
A circuit overseer was going
from door to door one morning,
and at one door,
a teenage boy answered.
He announced
that his parents were not at home,
and the circuit overseer said,
“Well, just before I leave
I’d like to show you something.”
And he showed the boy Jehovah’s name
in the Bible—Psalm 83:18.
The boy took the Bible to have a closer look,
turned around, went into the house,
and shut the door
—with the circuit overseer’s Bible.
The circuit overseer waited and waited,
and he thought he’d lost his Bible.
But then the boy’s mother
came to the door,
and she apologized for pretending
that she wasn’t home.
But she said she had been astonished
to learn that God has a name.
That led to a good witness.
Well, what else
do we know about God’s name?
The Bible says that “the name
of Jehovah is a strong tower.”
And we’re going to be able
to count on Jehovah
during the attack of Gog of Magog.
When Gog attacks,
Jehovah is going to vindicate himself
—He is going to protect His people
for the sake of His name.
And that’s another reason
for us to love Jehovah’s name
—to rejoice in his name.
Because his name is involved,
Jehovah is going to protect his people.
Well, when we talk
about the attack of Gog and Magog,
does it make you kind of nervous?
Here are a couple of things to think about.
First of all,
whose idea is it
for Gog to attack when he does?
Let’s find out.
Ezekiel chapter 38
(and we’re going to start with verse 4),
Ezekiel 38 beginning with verse 4.
Now, this is Jehovah talking
to that coalition of nations
known collectively as Gog.
And I want you to pay particular attention
to the first part of the verse,
that’s verse 4.
Jehovah says to Gog:
“I will turn you around
“and put hooks in your jaws
and bring you out with all your army.”
Now think about that.
“I will turn you around.”
It sounds like Gog
was headed in the opposite direction,
but then Jehovah turns him around,
and He draws him out to attack.
So, what does that tell you?
The timing of the attack is Jehovah’s.
Now, that doesn’t mean that Gog of Magog
had no intention of attacking God’s people.
He was planning to attack at some point.
But it’s the timing
of the attack that’s Jehovah’s.
The Pure Worship book
explains it this way—it says:
“As if putting hooks
in Gog’s jaws and leading him along . . .
“At some point following the destruction
of Babylon the Great,
“Jehovah may in some way lure the nations
“into carrying out
what is already in their hearts.
“Jehovah will thus set the stage
for the attack that leads to Armageddon.”
So, what are we worried about?
Everything is happening
according to Jehovah’s purpose.
Now, when we read verses 10-12,
we see what Gog has in mind.
Ezekiel 38:10-12,
and then leave your Bibles open,
because we’ll read one more verse.
Verses 10 to 12, it says:
“‘This is what
the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
“‘“In that day thoughts
will come into your heart
“‘“[I wonder who put them there?],
“‘“and you will devise an evil plan.
“‘“You I will say: ‘I will invade the land
of unprotected settlements.
“‘“‘I will come against
those living in security,
“‘“‘without disturbance,
all of them living in settlements
“‘“unprotected by walls, bars, or gates.’
It will be to take much spoil and plunder.”’”
But how will it all work out?
Verse 23:
“And I [that is, Jehovah, I]
“will certainly magnify myself
and sanctify myself
“and make myself known
before the eyes of many nations
and they will have to know
that I am Jehovah.”
So, what do we learn?
Everything is under control.
There is no need to panic.
Everything is going according to schedule
—Jehovah’s schedule.
So that’s the first thing.
There is another thing.
What precedes the attack of Gog and Magog?
What did we read in the Pure Worship book?
The destruction of Babylon the Great.
Now, have you ever considered
how that destruction
is going to fortify your faith
—is going to strengthen you—
so that you’re able
to endure the attack of Gog of Magog?
Think about it this way:
What other religious organization
foretells the destruction
of a world empire of false religion?
We’re the only ones,
because the others
are all part of Babylon the Great.
They’re not going to foretell
their destruction in the future.
So the destruction is going to be a surprise
to everyone but Jehovah’s Witnesses.
And when it occurs,
there’ll be no doubt in your mind
that you’re on the winning side
—that you’re on Jehovah’s side.
Some brothers get all upset
over some detail
they don’t think the organization
has the right take on.
It might be the pronunciation of God’s name
or the meaning of that name
or the meaning
of a single verse in the Scriptures.
They get all upset.
They get obsessed over one detail,
and it interferes with their worship.
But when Babylon the Great goes down,
will there be any doubt as to which channel
Jehovah God has been using
all this time to do his will?
You will be so glad
that you’re on the winning side.
Of course, it is sobering to think
about the final attack
of Gog of Magog on God’s people.
But it shouldn’t take away our joy.
Nehemiah 8:10, it says:
“The joy of Jehovah is your stronghold.”
Joy is actually a protection for us.
Now, did Nehemiah need a stronghold?
You know the answer to that.
His life was being threatened.
Pagan inhabitants of the land
wanted to kill him,
and then there were problems
in the congregation.
Some of the elders weren’t respecting
Jehovah’s law on marriage,
and the Sabbath wasn’t being observed.
And that was one of the reasons
why the Jews went into captivity
in the first place.
There were problems.
But Nehemiah didn’t allow
those problems to rob him of his joy.
We too can be joyful
even when we’re under a lot of pressure.
Our joy doesn’t depend on our circumstances.
Joy helped Jesus to endure a torture stake.
Joy motivated the apostles to keep preaching
even after they’d been beaten.
The “joy of Jehovah” can help you
to keep preaching in spite of indifference,
persecution, or any other obstacle.
Well, maybe you feel:
‘Well, that’s what I need.
I need more joy.’
Well, joy is an aspect
of the fruitage of the spirit.
So when you need more joy,
what do you do?
How do you get more of Jehovah’s spirit?
You ask for it: “Father, give me more joy.
“I want to be joyful in my service.
I want to rejoice in you.”
At the beginning of this talk,
we read Psalm 37:4,
and we focused particularly
on the first part of the verse,
the rejoicing in Jehovah.
Let’s turn to the second part
of the verse now,
Psalm 37:4,
and focus on that part for just a moment.
So Psalm 37:4, the first part says:
“Find exquisite delight in Jehovah,
“[and then] and he will grant you
the desires of your heart.”
What does your heart desire?
What are you
looking forward to in the new world?
Is it owning your own home?
In some countries,
it may be just having enough food to eat.
Are you looking forward to doing work
that you really enjoy?
or learning how to do something really well?
Or maybe you’re older now,
and you’re looking forward
to waking up every morning without pain
and without wondering,
‘I wonder what this pain means;
I wonder if I have something serious’
and never, ever having to think
about death again.
Are you looking forward
to conducting a Bible study
with an unbelieving relative who returns
or maybe with some historical figure?
This weekend we learned
that even faithful men of old
are going to have to adapt
to a different way of life
and learn how to worship Jehovah in a way
that will be acceptable to him then.
“No, Abraham,
that child does not need to be circumcised.”
“David, you’re not a king anymore.
If you want a glass of water,
you’ll have to get up and get it yourself.”
“Samuel, I know you’re grateful
to be resurrected,
“but we don’t
offer animal sacrifices anymore.
“So please, put that knife down
and leave that bull alone.”
Yes, there are going to be adjustments
that have to be made.
What about living conditions?
Where would you prefer
to live in the new world?
Maybe you love the country,
and if you’re assigned
to live in the country, you’d be very happy.
But suppose you love the country,
but you’re assigned to live in a city?
Well, you can learn to love the city.
Jehovah can help you to become
whatever you need to become.
Whatever you’re given to do
in the new world is going to be a blessing.
Jehovah gives ‘good gifts
and perfect presents’ to his servants.
And so Jehovah is going to make arrangements
that are going to be
for the ultimate good of all mankind.
Now, we don’t know
what arrangements will be made
to clean up the earth
just after the great tribulation,
but we do know there’ll be work to do.
And you may have the privilege
of sharing in that.
And think how you’ll feel
as you begin to move closer to perfection
both in mind and in body.
At that time, David’s words
recorded at Psalm 139:14
are going to take on greater meaning.
This is the last verse
we’re going to read during this convention.
I’d like you to follow along
—Psalm 139,
and verse 14.
Now this is imperfect David writing.
Psalm 139:14:
“I praise you because in an awe-inspiring way
“I am wonderfully made.
“Your works are wonderful,
I know this very well.”
David was impressed
by the way his imperfect body functioned.
Can you imagine how he’ll feel
when he’s perfect?
He’ll probably write another song.
Well, how do we
sum up this heart-stirring convention?
The best way I can think of is for you
to enjoy one final video
highlighting the reasons
for joy now and for the future.
Now, enjoy the video,
but pay attention to the music
because we’re going to be singing
that original song
at the end of this program.
We want everyone to sing.
Everyone must sing
—no just moving the lips, no faking.
Sing, but enjoy the video as well.
The stars that fill the summer night
Look down from above.
The beauty of the day and night
You fashioned with love.
Your hands prepared the land and sea,
And ev’rything that came to be
Brought joy to your heart.
There is joy in your creation,
In the message of salvation,
And the Paradise to come.
But to have your love forever
Is a real and lasting treasure.
You alone will prove to be
Our joy eternally.
Jehovah, we have all we need
To bring us delight—
The things we hear and touch and see
And feel deep inside.
You gave us such a perfect start,
Eternity in ev’ry heart,
And joy in our lives.
There is joy in your creation,
In the message of salvation,
And the Paradise to come.
But to have your love forever
Is a real and lasting treasure.
You alone will prove to be
Our joy eternally.
This joy could not be ours
Without the gift of your Son.
His sacrifice has paid the price
So joy could be ours for all time.
There is joy in your creation,
In the message of salvation,
And the Paradise to come.
But to have your love forever
Is a real and lasting treasure.
You alone will prove to be
Our joy eternally.
There is joy in your creation,
In the message of salvation,
And the Paradise to come.
But to have your love forever
Is a real and lasting treasure.
You alone will prove to be
Our joy eternally.
After that touching video,
what more is there to say?
“Find your greatest joy” in Jehovah.
Rejoice!
Our deliverance is near.